W-11104145-http-connector-1.8-kt (#1916)
mulesoft/docs-connectors: http/1.8/modules/ROOT/pages/http-request-ref.adoc

The Anypoint Connector for HTTP (HTTP Connector) *Request* operation enables you to consume an external HTTP service using the default `GET` method. Otherwise, you can choose what methods the operation accepts:

* The `GET` and `OPTIONS` methods do not send the payload in the request (the body of the HTTP request is empty).
* The `CONNECT`, `DELETE`, `PATCH`, `POST`, and `PUT` methods send the message payload as the body of the HTTP request.

After the HTTP *Request* operation sends an HTTP request, the connector receives an HTTP response and passes it to the next element in the Mule app's flow. The HTTP response indicates success or failure, using a variety of status codes. You can also customize how the operation generates HTTP responses in the connector operation global configuration.

By default, the operation sends the Mule message payload as the HTTP request body but you can customize it using a DataWeave script or expression. In addition to the body of the request, you can configure:

* Request and response size limits
* Headers
* Query parameters
* URI parameters
* A map of multiple headers or parameters

== Configure HTTP Request Connection

> To use an HTTP *Request* operation, you must set a request global configuration with a connection provider to a host URI, which can include a path. You can additionally configure a receiving port and a communication protocol.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use an HTTP *Request* operation, you must set a request global configuration with a connection provider to a host URI, which can include a path. You can also configure a receiving port and communication protocol.
```

* *Host* +

> Indicates where the requests are sent. Additionally, it can be a host name or an IP.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Indicates where the requests are sent. This can be a host name or an IP.
```

* *Port* +
Indicates where the requests are sent.
* *Protocol* +

> Indicates the protocol for communication, either HTTP for standard connections or HTTPS for TLS secure connections.

Reviewer: Should HTTP and HTTPS be in backticks here? Global for similar info.

To enable secure connections through HTTPS, you must define a TLS configuration context in the connection and provide:

* A keystore for the server
* A truststore if you need two-way authentication

To learn about TLS configuration, refer to the xref:mule-runtime::tls-configuration.adoc[Configure TLS with Keystores and Truststores] documentation.

Additionally, you can configure the *Authentication* field with the following types:

* *Basic authentication*
* *Digest authentication*
* *Ntlm authentication* (NT LAN Manager)

To learn about authentication types and examples, refer to the xref:http-authentication.adoc[Configure Authentication for HTTP Requests] documentation.

The following example shows how to configure the HTTP *Request* connection in Studio:

. In the *Mule Palette* view, select *HTTP > Request*.
. Drag *Request* to the Studio canvas.
. Click the plus sign (*+*) next to the *Connector configuration* field to configure a global element that can be used by all instances of HTTP *Request* in the app.
. Set *Host* to `localhost` and *Port* to `8081`:

> image::http-request-1.png[HTTP Request global configuration window with Host field set to localhost and Port field to 8081]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
image::http-request-1.png[HTTP Request global configuration window with the Host field set to localhost and Port field to 8081]
```

[start=5]
. Set *TLS configuration* to *Edit inline*.
. In the *Trust Store Configuration* section, set *Path* to `keystore.jks` and *Password* to `Mypassword`:

> image::http-request-2.png[Trust Store Configuration window with Path field set to keystore.jks and Password field to Mypassword]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
image::http-request-2.png[Trust Store Configuration window with the Path field set to keystore.jks and Password field to Mypassword]
```

[start=7]
. Set *Authentication* to *Basic authentication*.
. Set *Username* to `testuser` and *Password* to `Mypassword`.

> image::http-request-3.png[Authentication field set to Basic authentication and User field set to testuser and Password field to Mypassword]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
image::http-request-3.png[Authentication field set to Basic authentication, User field set to testuser, and Password field to Mypassword]
```

		</http:request-connection>
	</http:request-config>
  <flow name="httplistenerresponseFlow1" >
  <http:request method="GET" config-ref="HTTP_Request_configuration" path="/testpath"/>
</flow>
----

== Configure HTTP Request Connectivity Testing

The HTTP *Request* operation requires a global request configuration with a connection provider. Since HTTP Connector version 1.7.0, the connection provider supports connectivity testing.

=== Configure Minimal Connectivity Testing

To configure connectivity testing in the request global configuration without depending on the *Request* operation, add the `<http:connectivity-test>` and `requestPath` parameters in the `<http:request-connection>` tag as follows:

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<http:request-config name="requestConfigWithOnlyPath">
  <http:request-connection host="localhost" port="80" >
    <http:connectivity-test requestPath="/thePath" />
  </http:request-connection>
</http:request-config>
----

After you configure the connectivity testing, you can test the connection in Studio:

. Navigate to the *Global Elements* tab.
. Select *HTTP Request configuration (Configuration)*.
. Click *Edit* to open the global configuration window.

> . Click *Test connection...* to trigger a request to the URL `+http://localhost:80/thePath+`.

Reviewer: Optional: to me, it sounds better to put "URL" after the path name instead of before it.

> If a connection is established, a request is sent, and a response is received. The test connection is successful if the response status code is in the range of 0-399. Otherwise, the test connection failed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a connection is established, the connector sends a request and then receives a response. A response status code in the range 0-399 indicates that the test connection succeeded. Any other response code indicates that the test connection failed.
```

=== Configure Full Connectivity Testing

The connectivity testing `<http:connectivity-test>` requires only the `requestPath` parameter, though you can also configure additional parameters, as follows:

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<http:connectivity-test requestPath="/{pathUriParam}" requestMethod="POST"
                        responseTimeout="30" responseTimeoutUnit="SECONDS"
                        followRedirects="true">
  <http:request-body>
    <![CDATA[The Body]]>
  </http:request-body>
  <http:request-headers>
    <http:request-header key="Key" value="Value1" />
    <http:request-header key="Key" value="Value2" />
  </http:request-headers>
  <http:request-query-params>
    <http:query-param key="Key1" value="Value1" />
    <http:query-param key="Key2" value="Value2" />
  </http:request-query-params>
  <http:request-uri-params>
    <http:uri-param key="pathUriParam" value="testPath" />
  </http:request-uri-params>
  <http:response-validator>
    <http:success-status-code-validator values="200" />
  </http:response-validator>
</http:connectivity-test>
----

> In the previous example, if you click on the *Test Connection...* button in the global configuration window, HTTP Connector sends a POST request to `+http://localhost:80/testPath?Key1=Value1&Key2=Value2+`.

Reviewer: I think it's OK to say "In this example" since the paragraph is right after the example.

> The connector waits 30 seconds for a response and follows redirects if needed. Notice that both headers `key` have the same name, as it’s allowed. For this example, the test connection is successful only if the response status code is 200.

Reviewer: I suggest making a new paragraph starting with line 145.

"both headers key" is not grammatical. You can say something like this:
The `key` parameters in both headers have the same name...

as it's allowed  > which is allowed

=== Configure Response Validator Expression for Connectivity Testing

You can configure a response validator `<http:response-validator>` with a custom DataWeave expression for the `<http:connectivity-test>`, as follows:

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<http:request-config name="cfg">
  <http:request-connection host="localhost" port="80" >
    <http:connectivity-test requestPath="/testPath" >
      <http:response-validator>
        <http:expression-response-validator expression="#[
          attributes.statusCode == 200 and
          attributes.reasonPhrase == '' and
          attributes.headers['content-length'] == '0' and
          payload as String == '']" />
      </http:response-validator>
    </http:connectivity-test>
  </http:request-connection>
</http:request-config>
----

[NOTE]

> The available bindings in the previous expression are the `payload` and the `attributes`. You can also use the previous response validator configuration in the HTTP *Request* operation. However, in that context it also applies that the only available bindings in that expression are the `payload` and the `attributes` from the response.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, the available bindings are the `payload` and `attributes`. You can also use the validator configuration in the HTTP *Request* operation. However, in that context, the only available bindings are the `payload` and `attributes` from the response.
```

Reviewer: This paragraph needed a rewrite. I suggested new wording, but I'm not sure if I interpreted everything correctly. When you say "You can also use the previous response validator configuration in the HTTP *Request* operation" it is not clear what you would be using this for.
